---
id: labs
title: Why establish Web3 medical labs?
---

The medical industry is an industry with inherently strict barriers, but technological innovation is the main theme of this industry, and medical blockchain technology has its pivotal position in the future. In the field of general software, we can see many valuable open source projects and tools, but the medical industry is relatively few, and there are more phenomena of involution and repeated construction in the industry. Not only personal health data and hospitals are information islands, but medical software R&D companies rarely communicate with each other. Under such circumstances, disruptive innovation is the lack of a soil. We need to provide high-quality code for the medical industry ecology and create disruptive applications as much as possible! web3 medical labs ultimately serves users, and we are very concerned about "incentivization" and "commercialization." web3 medical labs has similarities with other open source communities, but it is clearly different from other open source communities to motivate based on the thinking and tools of the blockchain. The Web3 architecture is a mode of thinking, a tool platform, and a paradigm shift. This paradigm shift has a pivotal position in the history of medical technology. At present, only a few people in the world are acting, we have also discovered that the medical blockchain has a very broad development space at the same time, especially when the new crown epidemic is raging around the world, it is important to protect human health by uniting more developers to build a sound technical network and reconstruct the medical trust relationship.
